---
layout: post
title: "What's the right hash table API?"
category: c++
tags:
 - c++
pubdraft: yes
permalink: map-api
---

# The Associative Container API

When it comes to a hash table, there are basically only two interesting operations from an API perspective: lookup and insertion [^erase]. The standard library containers are all very consistent in how these operations are provided, across all the associative containers (maps and sets both, but I'll just focus on maps):

[^erase]: Erasing is certainly interesting from a data structure design perspective, but as far as API goes, not so much. There's a potentially interesting question of how to implement `erase_if` correctly, since having `erase(iterator)` return an `iterator` is a pessimization, but that's not my focus here.

```cpp
template <class Key, class Value /* and other parameters */>
struct associative_map {
    // lookup
    auto find(Key const&) -> iterator;
    auto find(Key const&) const -> const_iterator;
    template <class K> auto find(K const&) -> iterator;
    template <class K> auto find(K const&) const -> const_iterator;

    auto at(Key const&) -> Value&;
    auto at(Key const&) const -> Value const&;

    auto operator[](Key const&) -> Value&;
    auto operator[](Key&&) -> Value&;

    // insertion
    auto insert(pair<Key const, Value> const&) -> pair<iterator, bool>;
    auto insert(pair<Key const, Value>&&) -> pair<iterator, bool>;
    template <class P> auto insert(P&&) -> pair<iterator, bool>;

    template <class... Args>
    auto emplace(Args&&...) -> pair<iterator, bool>;

    template <class... Args>
    auto try_emplace(Key const&, Args&&...) -> pair<iterator, bool>;
    template <class... Args>
    auto try_emplace(Key&&, Args&&...) -> pair<iterator, bool>;
};
```

That's not the complete API for lookup or insertion, there's some other functions for lookup (like `equal_range` and, finally, `contains`) and insertion (like other overloads that also take an iterator), but these are the crux of the API that everyone uses all the time.

On the plus side, the standard library containers are very consistent. They all offer the same API. Many user-defined containers have followed suit and also offer the same API. This is a big benefit, since it allows abseil's hashtables to not even bother documenting their interface - you probably already know what it is [^except].

[^except]: Except when they differ from the standard library API.

On the minus side, I find more and more that this API is pretty lacking in both ergonomics and functionality.

The goal of this post is to argue what's missing the lookup and insertion APIs, and what we can hopefully improve upon.

# Improving `find()`

There are three flavors of lookup in the standard container API:

* `find()` takes a `Key` and returns an `iterator` or `const_iterator`, which might be `end()` on lookup failure
* `operator[]` takes a `Key`, potentially default-initializes a new element at that key, and returns a `Value&` to it
* `at()` takes a `Key` and either returns a `Value&` (or `Value const&`) to that element or throws an exception

Now, of these, `find()` is the only conditional lookup. `map[key]` always ends up with an element for that key, whether you had one before or not. And `map.at(key)` throws if the `key` isn't there, but otherwise is nice to ues. `find()` is the only choice for actually checking anything.

And `find()` returns an `iterator`. That is just how the standard library works. But returning an `iterator` is... very rarely the optimal choice for everyday problems. After all, how often do you actually _iterate_ that `iterator`? For ordered maps like `std::map`, iterating might make some sense, but for hash tables, iterating probably isn't even sensible. Most uses will end up doing something like this:

```cpp
auto it = map.find(key);
if (it != map.end()) {
    // do something with *it
} else {
    // maybe do something here
}
```

The lookup and the check for success have to be independent. This is because there is no iterator API in general for an iterator to check if it itself is the sentinel. So you have to do this two-step.

Even the simplest case of wanting to return the value or `-1`... that's not a single expression, that's two:

```cpp
auto it = map.find(key);
return it != map.end() ? it->second : -1;
```

Is there something we could do that would be more useful? This is a blog post, so you know the answer is yes.

One return choice, which gives you all the same conditional access to the element, but in a way that you can check the result itself for truthiness, would be this:

```cpp
auto find(Key const&) -> Optional<pair<Key const, Value>&>;
auto find(Key const&) const -> Optional<pair<Key const, Value> const&>;
```

See my [previous writing]({% post_url 2021-12-13-optional-ref-ptr %}) about why `Optional<T&>` is superior to `T*`. This now allows writing a check that starts:

```cpp
if (auto elem = map.find(key)) { ... }
```

And further allows building on the `Optional` by using continuation operations.

This is a lot better, but it's still not quite ideal. Heterogeneous lookup in associative containers is an important piece of functionality, so you might not _know_ the `Key` and it might be useful for it to be returned back to you. But most of the time your lookup is heterogeneous because you're using something like a `std::string_view` to lookup into a map whose key is `std::string`, so it's not like you really need the `std::string` anyway. So... why bother getting in back?

Additionally, while `Optional` supports continuation operations, something like `value_or()` still wants to give you back a `pair<K, V>` - and that's typically not what you're looking to get back when you're reaching for `value_or()`.

In that world, a more ergonomic API still would be to just return the value rather than the whole item:

```cpp
auto find(Key const&) -> Optional<Value&>;
auto find(Key const&) const -> Optional<Value const&>;
```

This API now very cleanly allows for the "value or `-1`" use case I mentioned earlier: that's now just `map.find(key).value_or(-1)`. Which you can still do if you get the whole element, it's just that you'd first do `map.find(key).transform(get<1>).value_or(-1)` [^get].

[^get]: Except of course that you can't just pass `get<1>` like that, so it's not as easy at it should be.

To me, `find()` returning an `Optional<Value&>` is nearly always the most useful choice. I rarely actually need the iterator or the full `std::pair` back. I'm doing a map lookup because I want the value. Just the value. And note also that one of the uses for having an `iterator` is to be able to pass to `erase()` - but the reference to the `Value` should be sufficient for these needs as well [^UB].

[^UB]: Modulo some questions about how UB it is to go from a `Value*` to its enclosing `pair<Key, Value>` object.

There's actually one more layer to peel off here, which is a much more narrow use-case. While `Optional<Value&>` is really the most useful choice for `find()`, in very particular circumstances it is more expensive than necessary. If `Value` is just an integral type, and you know that `0` is an invalid value for that type, then you don't want to bother with a pointer - you really want `find()` to just return a `Value` for you, or `0` on failure. This isn't always a valid choice, and it doesn't always make sense from a performance perspective. But sometimes... it does.

To summarize, there are basically four options for what `find` *could* return:

```cpp
auto find(Key const&) -> iterator;
auto find(Key const&) -> Optional<pair<Key const, Value>&>;
auto find(Key const&) -> Optional<Value&>;
auto find(Key const&) -> Value;
```

Which do we pick?

## Naming

What's interesting about these four algorithms is that they're not actually four different algorithms. It's really the same algorithm in all four cases - the only difference is:

* what is the value we return on success?
* what is the value we return on failure?

All the rest of the logic is identical. The choice of return type is very much just a parameter of `find()`. You can imagine providing a policy classes like:

```cpp
struct return_element {
    template <input_iterator I>
    static auto from_value(I const& it) -> Optional<iter_reference_t<I>> {
        return *it;
    }

    template <input_iterator I>
    static auto from_end(I const&) -> Optional<iter_reference_t<I>> {
        return {};
    }
};

struct return_value {
    template <input_iterator I>
    static auto from_value(I const& it) -> Optional<decltype(it->second)> {
        return it->second;
    }

    template <input_iterator I>
    static auto from_end(I const&) -> Optional<decltype(it->second)> {
        return {};
    }
};

struct return_value_or_zero {
    template <input_iterator I>
    static auto from_value(I const& it) -> decltype(auto(it->second))
        return it->second;
    }

    template <input_iterator I>
    static auto from_end(I const&) -> decltype(auto(it->second))
        return {};
    }
};
```

And then passing them in as a template parameter:

```cpp
auto a = map.find(key);                        // iterator
auto b = map.find<return_element>(key);        // Optional<pair<Key const, Value>&>
auto c = map.find<return_value>(key);          // Optional<Value&>
auto d = map.find<return_value_or_zero>(key);  // Value
```

To date, the only place that I've ever seen this used was [ThinkCell's library](https://github.com/think-cell/think-cell-library), as presented at multiple different C++ conferences. I think it's a pretty compelling pattern. This might be a little verbose, but it avoids having to come up with multiple different names for the same algorithm, and the pattern isn't unique to `map::find()` either.

Note that in this model, `contains()` is also just a different policy version of `find()`: `return_bool`. We just return `true` in one case and `false` in the other.

Now, these _could_ be different named algorithms in the API. `try_at()` might be a good name for the `return_value` version. `contains()` is certainly a much more user-friendly spelling than `find<return_bool>`.

Either way, the point is - there are more user-friendly flavors of `find()` out there that associative containers really should provide. `iterator` isn't really it. `Optional<Value&>` is probably what you want most of the time. While consistency with the standard library containers is, of course, a good thing - this is one situations where I'd be okay straying a little bit. I really don't actually want an `iterator` often enough for the nicer named function (`find()` is a pretty nice name for lookup) to take the more useful return type, but at the very least providing a `try_at()` that returns an `Optional<Value&>` would be wonderful.

# Improving `insert()`

While I find `find()` to be unergonomic, I find the `insert()` and `emplace()` family to be much more lacking.

Let's say we have a situation where we want to look up a given `key` and, if absent, insert a new element into th emap with value `value`. If we already have a `value` present, that's straightforward:

```cpp
auto [iter, success] = map.emplace(key, value);
```

I wish this function were also spelled `insert()` since how often do you actually have, specifically, a `pair<Key const, Value>` lying around to insert into the map? Approximately never? But okay, that's kind of just nit-picking.

Otherwise, this API is pretty reasonable - you get back an `iterator` pointing to either the existing or newly added element and a `bool` telling you if the insertion happened. As above, `iterator` isn't the best choice.

What if you _don't_ have a `value` lying around, and it's something you need to construct? We could write this:

```cpp
auto [iter, success] = map.emplace(key, acquire_value());
```

But this approach is pretty wasteful - `acquire_value()` isn't always necessary to call. If the `key` is already present in the map, then you don't want to waste the cycles acquiring a value that you don't need. It'll just immediately be thrown away.

We definitely don't want to "fix" this by writing:

```cpp
auto it = map.find(key);
bool success = false;
if (it == map.end()) {
    it = map.emplace(key, acquire_value());
    success = true;
}
```

Now we're only conditionally invoking `acquire_value()`, which is good, but we're doing two map lookups instead of one, which is bad. Maybe the lookup is cheaper enough than the cost of `acquire_value()` that we come out ahead anyway, but that seems underwhelming.


There _is_ a conditional insert API available to us, but it only comes in this form:

```cpp
auto try_emplace(Key const&, auto&&...) -> pair<iterator, bool>;
auto try_emplace(Key&&, auto&&...) -> pair<iterator, bool>;
```

Which... is great if `acquire_value()` is actually a constructor call spelled `Value(a, b, c)`, but that really isn't typical. We can work around this by providing a lazy evaluation primitive:

```cpp
template <class F>
struct lazy_call {
    F f;

    template <class T> operator T() { return f(); }
};

#define LAZY(expr) [&]{ return expr; }
```

which allows us to write:

```cpp
auto [iter, success] = map.try_emplace(key, LAZY(acquire_value()));
```

Now, we only call `acquire_value()` if the `key` isn't in the `map`, and we're still only doing a single lookup. Great! I mean... pretty clunky, but it does get the job done. So far.

Let me throw another wrench in the mix: what if `acquire_value()` can fail? That is, what if we want to lookup a `key` in our `map` and, if it's not there, do some work to then find what the value of the `key` should be. If that work succeeds, insert the new value. Otherwise, bail.

You can... definitely hack that together:

```cpp
try {
    auto [iter, success] = map.try_emplace(key, lazy_call{[&]{
        Optional<Value> result = try_to_acquire_value();
        if (result) {
            return *result;
        } else {
            throw Something{};
        }
    }});
} catch (Something ) {
    // I dunno?
}
```

`try_emplace` can't... really fail. It has no mechanism for this - so our only bet is to keep extending this lazy initialization hack by now throwing an exception out of it. An exception which we're using exclusively for control flow, because we're in a situation that simply doesn't allow for any other control flow.

This is particularly cumbersome since we have to introduce another scope in order to catch this exception. We want to localize this `catch` as tightly as possible around the `try_emplace()` - but then we also probably want to use the returned `iterator` later, so do we declare it uninitialized earlier? But doing so requires spelling out the type of the iterator?

There's not a lot of good answers here. Can we do better?

## Enter: the `entry` API

Let's say we had the following API:

```cpp
Entry e = map.entry(key);
```

Where `entry()` returns an object that is either occupied (and you can access the element there, same as with an `iterator`) or vacant (but retaining the location of the `key` would be inserted, were that the desired behavior - a more useful choice than `end()`).

If we just want to insert a default value and get a reference to the result, there's a function for that:

```cpp
// similar to map[key], except explicitly choosing the new value
// which would not necessarily require default construction
// also more obviously inserts an element - avoiding the not uncommon bug where
// users intend to simply lookup 'key' and accidentally insert it too
Value& v = map.entry(key).or_insert(new_value);
```

If we want to insert a default value that we get from a function call, as we tried to hack around earlier with the lazy initialization mechanism, there's a function for that too:

```cpp
// this is what we did earlier with
// map.try_emplace(key, LAZY(acquire_value()))
Value& v = map.entry(key).or_insert_with(acquire_value);
```

And we can even fairly straightforwardly handle the situation where `acquire_value()` is fallible, without resorting to using exceptions for artificial control flow:

```cpp
auto entry = map.entry(key);
if (entry.is_vacant()) {
    if (auto result = try_to_acquire_value()) {
        entry.insert(*result);
    } else {
        // handle this case
    }
}

// now entry is occupied
```

All of the above examples have fairly easy-to-follow control flow, only do a single map lookup, offer convenient _and efficient_ solutions for a variety of problems.

Incidentally, this is the API for [Rust's HashMap](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/collections/hash_map/enum.Entry.html).

The `insert()`, `emplace()`, and `try_emplace()` APIs that we have today are just pretty lacking in ergonomics and functionality compared to the `entry()` approach. And while I can write free functions to return whatever I really wanted from `find`, there's no way for me to provide an `entry` API externally. At least not for all associative containers - `std::map` can give me an `iterator` to where a particular `key` should go, but not `std::unordered_map`.

# Conclusion

There is a common standard library API for associative containers, that most associative containers implement for consistency. The consistency is a good user experience in of itself, but the API for lookup and insertion is lacking.

For lookup, the most useful result in most contexts is an `Optional<Value&>`, but the API we have just gives us an `iterator`. This inhibits continuation and chaining, requiring us to declare the result `iterator` on its own line and accessing the value with the cryptic-yet-unfortunately-familiar `it->second`.

For insertion, we can hack around the lack of conditional insertion API - but only to a certain extent. The API is still built around the specific case of wanting to insert a `Value` that we already have, not around a `Value` that we still need to compute, and definitely not around a `Value` whose computation is fallible. An `entry()`-based API would allow for a clean way of solving this problem.

Perhaps this is something to lobby for the new [Boost.Unordered](https://www.boost.org/doc/libs/1_82_0/libs/unordered/doc/html/unordered.html), which Joaquín M. López Muñoz recently spoke about at using::cpp: [More than a rehash](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Rg8MZ5pJIJA).

---
